README.md, before:

# Introduction #

---

The rc-shim script is meant to be used as a shim between an existing 
SysV-styled rc script system, and a daemontools-alike supervision 
system.  By utilizing an existing supervisor, some of the weaknesses of 
the rc system can be avoided.

The script takes the place of the original script, typically found in 
/etc/init.d, and performs a translation of the start/stop/restart/status 
commands into something the supervisor can use.



# Installation #

---

## Prerequisites #

1. You must have a supervision suite installed.  Currently, runit and s6 
are supported, but nearly any daemontools-styled supervisor that 
supports launching via service definition directories should 
work.  Specifically, the supervision suite must support a service scan 
directory.

2. You must have a set of supervision definitions installed.  The 
definitions must preside separately of both the directory containing the 
symlinks, and the directory where the supervisor states are maintained.

3. You will only be able to use the shim with rc scripts that launch a 
single daemon.  Scripts that launch multiple daemons (on Linux, 
typically Samba or the bluetooth stack, for example) will require 
additional setup to be used properly.

4. A compatible shell.  Currently `ash`, `bash`, `dash`, `ksh`, `mksh`, 
`posh`, and busybox `sh` are all known to work.

## Installation Steps #

1. Download the shim to a separate location, then change directory to
that location.

2. Copy the os-settings and supervisor-settings files to where your 
init.d scripts are located.  They must all be in the same directory. 
Example:

    >sudo cp os-settings /etc/init.d/
    >sudo cp supervisor-settings /etc/init.d/

3. Adjust os-settings to match your installation.  If you do not change 
the default settings, the shim will fail and refuse to run.  This is by 
design.

4. Adjust supervisor-settings to match your supervisor's installation.  
There are presets embedded in the file which can be used by uncommenting 
the appropriate entries.  If you do not change the default settings, the 
shim will fail and refuse to run.  This is also by design.

5. At the moment, only manual installation is supported.  For each rc 
script you wish to replace with a shim, rename the original, and create 
a copy of the shim in its place.  Here is an example using snmpd:

    >sudo mv /etc/init.d/snmpd /etc/init.d/snmpd.original
    >sudo cp shim /etc/init.d/snmpd

6. By default, the shim will call /bin/sh as the shell to be used.  If 
you wish to use another supported shell, you will want to change the 
first line of the shim to the shell you desire.

7. Test your results.  Please note that the test WILL cause the service 
to be stopped and started repeatedly; you do NOT want to perform the 
test on a live or "production" service that is receiving active use.

    >sudo ./shim-test snmpd


## How this works #

The basic idea behind "System-V styled" rc scripts is that a set of 
shell scripts will stop or start service(s) as needed.  The scripts are 
stored in a specific directory (on Linux systems, typically /etc/init.d) 
and each script will stop or start a specific service.  Note that a 
service can be a single daemon, multiple daemons, or even no daemon at 
all, such as when firewall rules are loaded; in that case, only a change 
of the system state occurs.

When your system start up, shuts down, or changes "run levels", it is 
actually calling specific scripts in a specific sequence.  It does this 
by using a special directory corresponding to the runlevel which 
contains a set of symbolic links.  The links point back to these scripts 
and have special names that tell the rc system if it is starting or 
stopping a service.  The entire rc system is simply calling each rc 
script in a specific sequence, using those special symlinks with the 
corresponding stop or start command.

The shim takes advantage of the fact that the links merely point to the 
appropriate script, and that the rc system calls the script by name.  It 
functions by replacing the original rc script with something that is 
designed to talk to a supervision suite.  Instead of the rc script 
attempting to start or stop the service directly, the shim interprets 
the "start" and "stop" commands and then sends commands to the 
supervisor to take the appropriate action, as well as maintaining any 
symbolic links in the supervisor's scan directory.  The supervisor then 
handles the start/stop command on behalf of the shim.  Because the 
existing symlinks in each runlevel will continue to point to the shim, 
everything else - including the use of the "service" command - continues 
to work as expected.  This arrangement remains compatible with system 
startup, shutdown, and runlevel changes.  As far as the rest of the 
system is concerned, the shim is just another rc script, and behaves as 
such.

There is one caveat.  Because there is no universal way to signal a 
daemon to reload its settings, as a result, the "force-reload" command 
is only a code stub in the shim that emits a warning and fails with a 
value of 1.  However, the shim does have a function stub for the 
"force-reload" command that allows you to implement this feature, if you 
desire it.  You simply place the daemon-specific command or signalling 
in the stub and it should function as anticipated.


## Troubleshooting #

Here are some considerations to help you fix a problem or two:

0. *Do you have a way to access your system in the event that a shim 
malfunctions?* Because the rc scripts are called at boot time and 
shutdown, it is possible to really foul things up to the point you don't 
have a working system you can access.  While I have tried to make the 
shim as safe as I can, there are still circumstances beyond my control. 
This includes things like having a malformed run script for ssh on a 
remote system, and then discovering after reboot that the shim can't 
start the service because the run script is wrong, completely locking 
you out in the process and requiring a trip to the physical machine 
itself.  This unpleasant situation can be avoided with testing. Test 
each entry you change out, and then test it again.  Wait until you are 
100% satisfied with the results before changing out the rc script.  Or 
to put it in a shorter way: *If in doubt, don't switch it out!*

1. *Do you have a set of service definitions, active services, and a 
service control directory?* The shim only provides an interface to the 
existing service manager, not service definitions themselves.  You must 
supply your own run scripts for the shim to have something to work with.

2. *Did you change all of the settings correctly?*  If you fail to change 
either of the settings files, the scripts will immediately fail.  This 
is by design and was meant to prevent the script from making an 
assumption about the state of the system it was installed on by forcing 
the system administrator to specify it.

3. *Are you using a supported shell?* You can adjust the shim to run 
with any shell that is supported.  Using a shell that isn't tested can 
(and usually will) result in the shim failing.

4. *Is the rc script name different from the actual service name?* The 
script will attempt to guess the daemon's name using the name of itself, 
but this is not always successful because there is no requirement that 
the name of the rc script match the actual daemon name.  A common 
example is the ISC bind service having the rc script named as "bind", 
but the daemon is "named".  The shim has a provision for this, you can 
simply edit that specific copy of the shim to have the correct name. 
Locate the line in the shim that looks like this: *SVCNAME=$MYNAME*.  
Using our "bind/named" example, replace "$MYNAME" with "named".  This 
skips the "guess" that the script takes and explicitly identifies the 
name of the daemon itself.  Of course, the service definition directory 
will have to have the same name for this to work correctly.

5. *Does the rc script actually try to launch multiple daemons?* An 
example would be Samba, which usually has two daemons launched together, 
smnd and nmbd.  Many installations will provide a single rc script to 
launch both at the same time, typically named "smb" or "samba".  This is 
contrary to how supervision works because a supervisor is usually 
assigned to a specific daemon, and not a group of daemons.  There is a 
work-around for this that requires a bit of work but will allow the shim 
to continue to function, while fully integrating with the supervisor. 
You will need to create a service definition that consists of a service 
scan, and then place each daemon needed as a definition into the new 
service scan directory.  Then when you use the shim, you will launch the 
service scan, not the individual daemons.  By using a nested service 
scan, the emulation of a "multi daemon launch" is maintained, at the 
expense of the increase in the size fo the supervision tree.  In this 
example, you would create a "samba" definition to match the naming of 
the original rc script, and the daemon launched is acutally another 
service scan.  That service scan will then have in it the service 
definitons for smbd and nmbd.  Whenever the service is brought up, the 
service scan will bring up the other two with it.  Please note that this 
weakens the the assurance you receive of a correct start in the same way 
that an asynchronous start would, i.e. you are assuming the supervisor 
will deal with all of the issues and will not be able to directly see 
the results. Also note that any status report you will receive will be 
for the service scan and not the individual service.

Commit message:

Split into two types, plain and "fancy" notifications.

README.md, after:

# Introduction #

---

The rc-shim script is meant to be used as a shim between an existing 
SysV-styled rc script system, and a daemontools-alike supervision 
system.  By utilizing an existing supervisor, some of the weaknesses of 
the rc system can be avoided.

The script takes the place of the original script, typically found in 
/etc/init.d, and performs a translation of the start/stop/restart/status 
commands into something the supervisor can use.



# Installation #

---

## Prerequisites #

1. You must have a supervision suite installed.  Currently, runit and s6 
are supported, but nearly any daemontools-styled supervisor that 
supports launching via service definition directories should 
work.  Specifically, the supervision suite must support a service scan 
directory.

2. You must have a set of supervision definitions installed.  The 
definitions must preside separately of both the directory containing the 
symlinks, and the directory where the supervisor states are maintained.

3. You will only be able to use the shim with rc scripts that launch a 
single daemon.  Scripts that launch multiple daemons (on Linux, 
typically Samba or the bluetooth stack, for example) will require 
additional setup to be used properly.

4. A compatible shell.  Currently `ash`, `bash`, `dash`, `ksh`, `mksh`, 
`posh`, and busybox `sh` are all known to work.

## Installation Steps #

1. Download the shim to a separate location, then change directory to
that location.

2. Copy the os-settings and supervisor-settings files to where your 
init.d scripts are located.  They must all be in the same directory. 
Example:

    >sudo cp os-settings /etc/init.d/

    >sudo cp supervisor-settings /etc/init.d/

3. Adjust os-settings to match your installation.  If you do not change 
the default settings, the shim will fail and refuse to run.  This is by 
design.

4. Adjust supervisor-settings to match your supervisor's installation.  
There are presets embedded in the file which can be used by uncommenting 
the appropriate entries.  If you do not change the default settings, the 
shim will fail and refuse to run.  This is also by design.

5. At the moment, only manual installation is supported.  For each rc 
script you wish to replace with a shim, rename the original, and create 
a copy of the shim in its place.  Here is an example using snmpd:

    >sudo mkdir -p /etc/init.d/ARCHIVE ; mv /etc/init.d/snmpd /etc/init.d/ARCHIVE/snmpd.original

    >sudo cp shim-plain /etc/init.d/snmpd

6. By default, the shim will call /bin/sh as the shell to be used.  If 
you wish to use another supported shell, you will want to change the 
first line of the shim to the shell you desire.

7. Test your results.  Please note that the test WILL cause the service 
to be stopped and started repeatedly; you do NOT want to perform the 
test on a live or "production" service that is receiving active use.

    >sudo ./shim-test snmpd

If you want to have "fancy printing" instead of the standard output of 
the supervisor commands, you can substitute shim-fancy wherever you see 
shim-plain.  NOTE: this is currently an experimental option.  The 
functionality remains the same, but the output may be munged as a 
result of the processing performed.  You use it at your own risk.


## How this works #

The basic idea behind "System-V styled" rc scripts is that a set of 
shell scripts will stop or start service(s) as needed.  The scripts are 
stored in a specific directory (on Linux systems, typically /etc/init.d) 
and each script will stop or start a specific service.  Note that a 
service can be a single daemon, multiple daemons, or even no daemon at 
all, such as when firewall rules are loaded; in that case, only a change 
of the system state occurs.

When your system start up, shuts down, or changes "run levels", it is 
actually calling specific scripts in a specific sequence.  It does this 
by using a special directory corresponding to the runlevel which 
contains a set of symbolic links.  The links point back to these scripts 
and have special names that tell the rc system if it is starting or 
stopping a service.  The entire rc system is simply calling each rc 
script in a specific sequence, using those special symlinks with the 
corresponding stop or start command.

The shim takes advantage of the fact that the links merely point to the 
appropriate script, and that the rc system calls the script by name.  It 
functions by replacing the original rc script with something that is 
designed to talk to a supervision suite.  Instead of the rc script 
attempting to start or stop the service directly, the shim interprets 
the "start" and "stop" commands and then sends commands to the 
supervisor to take the appropriate action, as well as maintaining any 
symbolic links in the supervisor's scan directory.  The supervisor then 
handles the start/stop command on behalf of the shim.  Because the 
existing symlinks in each runlevel will continue to point to the shim, 
everything else - including the use of the "service" command - continues 
to work as expected.  This arrangement remains compatible with system 
startup, shutdown, and runlevel changes.  As far as the rest of the 
system is concerned, the shim is just another rc script, and behaves as 
such.

There is one caveat.  Because there is no universal way to signal a 
daemon to reload its settings, as a result, the "force-reload" command 
is only a code stub in the shim that emits a warning and fails with a 
value of 1.  However, the shim does have a function stub for the 
"force-reload" command that allows you to implement this feature, if you 
desire it.  You simply place the daemon-specific command or signalling 
in the stub and it should function as anticipated.


## Troubleshooting #

Here are some considerations to help you fix a problem or two:

0. *Do you have a way to access your system in the event that a shim 
malfunctions?* Because the rc scripts are called at boot time and 
shutdown, it is possible to really foul things up to the point you don't 
have a working system you can access.  While I have tried to make the 
shim as safe as I can, there are still circumstances beyond my control. 
This includes things like having a malformed run script for ssh on a 
remote system, and then discovering after reboot that the shim can't 
start the service because the run script is wrong, completely locking 
you out in the process and requiring a trip to the physical machine 
itself.  This unpleasant situation can be avoided with testing. Test 
each entry you change out, and then test it again.  Wait until you are 
100% satisfied with the results before changing out the rc script.  Or 
to put it in a shorter way: *If in doubt, don't switch it out!*

1. *Do you have a set of service definitions, active services, and a 
service control directory?* The shim only provides an interface to the 
existing service manager, not service definitions themselves.  You must 
supply your own run scripts for the shim to have something to work with.

2. *Did you change all of the settings correctly?*  If you fail to change 
either of the settings files, the scripts will immediately fail.  This 
is by design and was meant to prevent the script from making an 
assumption about the state of the system it was installed on by forcing 
the system administrator to specify it.

3. *Are you using a supported shell?* You can adjust the shim to run 
with any shell that is supported.  Using a shell that isn't tested can 
(and usually will) result in the shim failing.

4. *Is the rc script name different from the actual service name?* The 
script will attempt to guess the daemon's name using the name of itself, 
but this is not always successful because there is no requirement that 
the name of the rc script match the actual daemon name.  A common 
example is the ISC bind service having the rc script named as "bind", 
but the daemon is "named".  The shim has a provision for this, you can 
simply edit that specific copy of the shim to have the correct name. 
Locate the line in the shim that looks like this: *SVCNAME=$MYNAME*.  
Using our "bind/named" example, replace "$MYNAME" with "named".  This 
skips the "guess" that the script takes and explicitly identifies the 
name of the daemon itself.  Of course, the service definition directory 
will have to have the same name for this to work correctly.

5. *Does the rc script actually try to launch multiple daemons?* An 
example would be Samba, which usually has two daemons launched together, 
smnd and nmbd.  Many installations will provide a single rc script to 
launch both at the same time, typically named "smb" or "samba".  This is 
contrary to how supervision works because a supervisor is usually 
assigned to a specific daemon, and not a group of daemons.  There is a 
work-around for this that requires a bit of work but will allow the shim 
to continue to function, while fully integrating with the supervisor. 
You will need to create a service definition that consists of a service 
scan, and then place each daemon needed as a definition into the new 
service scan directory.  Then when you use the shim, you will launch the 
service scan, not the individual daemons.  By using a nested service 
scan, the emulation of a "multi daemon launch" is maintained, at the 
expense of the increase in the size fo the supervision tree.  In this 
example, you would create a "samba" definition to match the naming of 
the original rc script, and the daemon launched is acutally another 
service scan.  That service scan will then have in it the service 
definitons for smbd and nmbd.  Whenever the service is brought up, the 
service scan will bring up the other two with it.  Please note that this 
weakens the the assurance you receive of a correct start in the same way 
that an asynchronous start would, i.e. you are assuming the supervisor 
will deal with all of the issues and will not be able to directly see 
the results. Also note that any status report you will receive will be 
for the service scan and not the individual service.
